---
title: "Semantic Segmentation Method for High-Resolution Tomato Seedling Point Clouds Based on Sparse Convolution"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/li2024semantic
date: 2024-12-31
venue: 'Agriculture'
paperurl: 'https://www.mdpi.com/2077-0472/15/1/74/pdf?version=1735635552'
bibtexurl: 'https://scholar.googleusercontent.com/scholar.bib?q=info:wyXDXXALPh0J:scholar.google.com/&output=citation&scisdr=Cn2cHjwGEICCwbc5jns:AHkA5jQAAAAAaXA_lnspUbW-jyfyN56KxlIUki4&scisig=AHkA5jQAAAAAaXA_lj0bYL8xYnkVAwj9LqPk2L4&scisf=4&ct=citation&cd=-1&hl=zh-CN&scfhb=1'
citation: 'Li S, Yan Z, Ma B, et al. Semantic Segmentation Method for High-Resolution Tomato Seedling Point Clouds Based on Sparse Convolution[J]. Agriculture, 2024, 15(1): 74.'
---

Semantic segmentation of three-dimensional (3D) plant point clouds at the stem-leaf level is foundational and indispensable for high-throughput tomato phenotyping systems. However, existing semantic segmentation methods often suffer from issues such as low precision and slow inference speed. To address these challenges, we propose an innovative encoding-decoding structure, incorporating voxel sparse convolution (SpConv) and attention-based feature fusion (VSCAFF) to enhance semantic segmentation of the point clouds of high-resolution tomato seedling images. Tomato seedling point clouds from the Pheno4D dataset labeled into semantic classes of ‘leaf’, ‘stem’, and ‘soil’ are applied for the semantic segmentation. In order to reduce the number of parameters so as to further improve the inference speed, the SpConv module is designed to function through the residual concatenation of the skeleton convolution kernel and the regular convolution kernel. The feature fusion module based on the attention mechanism is designed by giving the corresponding attention weights to the voxel diffusion features and the point features in order to avoid the ambiguity of points with different semantics having the same characteristics caused by the diffusion module, in addition to suppressing noise. Finally, to solve model training class bias caused by the uneven distribution of point cloud classes, the composite loss function of Lovász-Softmax and weighted cross-entropy is introduced to supervise the model training and improve its performance. The results show that mIoU of VSCAFF is 86.96%, which outperformed the performance of PointNet, PointNet++, and DGCNN, respectively. IoU of VSCAFF achieves 99.63% in the soil class, 64.47% in the stem class, and 96.72% in the leaf class. The time delay of 35ms in inference speed is better than PointNet++ and DGCNN. The results demonstrate that VSCAFF has high performance and inference speed for semantic segmentation of high-resolution tomato point clouds, and can provide technical support for the high-throughput automatic phenotypic analysis of tomato plants.